
Foulis, Elena. Oral Narratives of Latin@s in Ohio. Center for Folklore Studies. Jan. 2018. https://cfs.osu.edu/archives/collections/ONLO.  Accessed 5 November 2018. 

                                              Latinxs in Ohio 
 
Who are the Latinxs living in Ohio? No need to dive into written documents at an archival institution; Dr. Elena Foulis, 
Latinx scholar, and senior lecture at Ohio State University (OSU), has recorded and created a digital collection, Oral 
Narratives of Latin@s, in collaboration with the Ohio Hispanic Heritage project, an OSU sponsored initiative, where one can 
connect to the lives and stories of various Latinxs in Ohio. Additional collaborators are Cassie Patterson, project archivist, 
and Dr. José Díaz, curator and librarian. The digital collection is housed within the Folklore Archives of OSU’s Center for 
Folklore Studies and Department of English. To locate the video collection, one needs to select the Archives dropdown menu, 
choosing Collections, then Oral Narratives of Latin@s. 

Once you reach the page, you’ll learn Dr. Foulis’ goal for this project is to create a resource that preserves the history of 
Latinxs, at the same time presenting counternarratives to deconstruct the stereotypes of Latinxs in this country and, more 
specifically, in Ohio. The collection, currently, consists of sixty-seven videos that range in length from twenty minutes to 
two hours of participants answering various questions, developed by scholars. Participants’ backgrounds are vastly 
differently; some have been in the state of Ohio since the 1940’s and others are recent arrivals. Also, their careers, 
socioeconomic backgrounds, and reasons for moving to Ohio vary. The interviews will have one individual at a time, while 
others will have multiple participants, including families, groups of friends, and couples. Because of the diversity of the 
interviewees, their responses provide an intergenerational perspective on life in Ohio, as well as strategies to preserve 
their culture (Foulis, 2018). 

As I navigated the collect and the videos, my intentions were to review the Oral Narrative collection, solely as a scholar, 
but as a fellow Midwestern Latina, I felt a strong connection to everyone’s stories. In the late 90s, my family moved from the 
east coast to a city that is less than a few miles from Ohio. Many of the places mentioned in the videos, I recognized due to 
my family’s frequent visits to these locations. To say the least, I was thrilled to engage with this material. 

Coming from an multi-ethnic and biracial family, and moving from New York to the Midwest was a challenge for my family. We 
left everything we were accustomed to, for a place where we did not see or hear people like us, nor did most people understand 
our backgrounds. Therefore, as I watched the videos, I found myself agreeing with several of the comments made of 
participants’ lived experiences and values, because to me it represented my families and our reality in the Midwest at a 
specific moment in time. As a result, I felt connected to all of the individuals and proud to hear their stories. 
           
In addition, I was excited to find the majority of narratives were in Spanish, which was surprising due to the fact that 
English is the dominant language in the Midwest. This important decision represented Dr. Foulis’ centering and celebration of 
the Spanish language and Latinx culture, which was emphasized by the lack of English translations for the videos and shown by 
the heritage speakers proudly using the language they are most comfortable with. This collection of video narrative is an 
authentic example how the archive can bring to the forefront the voices of those usually excluded and marginalized to support 
their efforts to preserve their stories.  

Returning to my reactions as I read, I couldn’t help, but question my excitement. Why was I drawn to these stories, even 
though I frequently and intentionally visited and engaged with Latinxs spaces? After reading “ To Suddenly Discover Yourself 
Existing” by Caswell, et al., the aha moment appeared and they provided the words to describe my emotions. The authors 
introduced symbolic annihilation and representational belonging and their meanings resonated with me. They defined symbolic 
annihilation as the following “to be an eternal outsider whose very existence is presumed an impossibility”(Caswell et al. 
58), and representational belonging “describes the affective responses community members have to seeing their communities 
presented with complexity and nuance” (Caswell et al. 75). This resonated with me because I never realized that the stories of 
my small, local marginalized community could be collected, seen as valued, and recorded for others to learn from our lived 
experiences and for us to sustain our culture. This collection of video narratives Latinxs matter and we contribute valuable 
perspective and knowledge to what it means to be Latinx in Ohio. 

Nevertheless, I am left pondering what are the implications of this collection being held and supported by an institution of 
higher education. As universities can be sites of oppression for marginalized groups. While reviewing the site and the 
recordings, I was thrown off by the use of university propaganda as the background display. Was OSU trying to remind the 
viewer they funded this project in order to engender positive perceptions of OSU? Equally important, is the use of written 
English language to describe the project, why did Dr. Foulis and her team not include a Spanish version, for predominantly 
Spanish speakers to read? With this in mind, I ask could this project be handed to community leaders to flourish into an 
independent community archive, or what are the possibilities of community members can become collaborators of the project? 
Thus,  “Archives and archivists should empower rather than wield power” (Kelleher 21). Even though, this collection can be a 
source of empowerment, there’s opportunity to transfer power to the community.
 
All in all, Dr. Foulis and her team are centralizing and conserving the oral history of Latinxs in Ohio. Their efforts a 
necessary task that is part of a big movement to represent marginalized groups in spaces where they have been excluded in the 
past. 




                                                      Works Cited

Caswell, Michelle, et al. “To Suddenly Discover Yourself Existing: Uncovering the Impact of Community Archives.” The American 
Archivist, vol. 79, no. 1, 2016, pp. 56-81. 

Foulis, Elena. Oral Narratives of Latin@s in Ohio. OSU Folklore Archives. https://cfs.osu.edu/archives/collections/ONLO. 

